Any programmer needs a decent code editor. Note that notepad is *not*
a decent code editor, while gedit is only barely decent. There are
many sensible editors out there, and you should search for the one
that you prefer.

Unless you have a good reason, **you are strongly advised to use
[geany](http://www.geany.org/) for this project**. The rest of this page
is there for your erudition.

A lot of people told me that [Atom](https://atom.io/) is a very good
code editor, both lightweight and powerful. It still misses some
features so I did not switched myself, but you definitely want to give
it a try.

Personally, I code using [Eclipse](http://www.eclipse.org), but I
would not advise you to start learning with Eclipse. That beast is
huge (several Gb of RAM), and not very intuitive for learners. But if
you want to dig a swimming pool, will you get a light and nice spoon,
or an heavy-duty excavator? If you decide to go for the powerful
excavator, pick the Java version of eclipse, then add the
[PyDev](http://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/pydev-python-ide-eclipse)
plugin.

When not using Eclipse, I am a happy
[Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) user. That's another
venerable editor (both emacs and Vim first came out in 1976), which
main feature is its configuration power: you can do everything in
emacs, provided that you configure it correctly (or develop the
right plugin). But that's also its main drawback: configuring the
perfect environment can become very time consuming. For now, if you
go for emacs (which would earn you my respect), you should just add
the following to the file ~/.emacs to enable Ctrl-C and friends.
```(cua-mode t)```

Real Hackers certainly prefer Vim. You will never find any Unix box
where it is not installed. Even if I avoid this editor when I can, I
learned its basic usage over the years. This [online
game](http://vim-adventures.com/) constitutes a perfect introduction
to Vim. And it's fun too, so you can play it even if you don't plan to
use Vim on a day-to-day basis :)

If you are using Mac, then you will probably like [Sublime
Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/). Windows people sometimes prefer
[Code::Blocks](http://www.codeblocks.org/), but I cannot appreciate
any of these tools as I am forbidden to read their source code (ask me
if you want an explanation). 

Finally, the Python documentation lists [several dozen of
editors](https://wiki.python.org/moin/PythonEditors) that you can
choose from.