This page gathers several crazy ideas that **I don't want you to
implement during the next two weeks**, but I would love to see
implemented at some point in the future.

You could make it so that the map is circular, with a little planet in
the center, and the gravity always moving you to that center (the
Cartesian coordinates that the engine requires are probably not very
adapted here).


The collision detection is one of the central problem in many games.
I'm not sure that you have enough moving entities to mandate a complex
solution such as Q-trees, but there is other approaches that you may
want to try. The ground collision detection will also need
improvements when you will add "islands" or concave spaces to your
game.
  
AI is another big topic in games programming. How could the mankind
avoid getting flattened by the lander while managing to get rescued?
How should the enemies behave to make the game challenging but doable?
Could you implement several difficulty levels, maybe? Programming an
automated player is certainly possible, but it sounds like a lot of
work.
  
Gameplay elements are also worth investigating, even if it's less
algorithmic (and thus less related to such a programing project). What
kind of enemy behavior could you implement? The ground may be windy,
or it may be some radioactive areas or other? Or your bullets may
partially destroy the cave, that could partially collapse if you shoot
too much? Maybe you prefer RPG games where you are rewarded for the
guys that you save, in order to buy bigger and better ships? Or you
prefer RTS games, where your guys the mine ore that gets transformed
into metal and then ships by specific plants? What if you take ship
heat into account, forbidding to use the motor too often, regardless
of the remaining fuel amount? 
  
As you can see, we could find enough extension ideas in that game to
occupate a few years at least. This is the good thing when you program:
there is always a nice thing that you could add to your pet project.
Only your imagination is limiting. And time.

Your time is limited, so you'd better do just as I do: dream of these
features, play with the idea, think about how it could possibly be
done and mentally evaluate the alternatives. And then move on to
something else such as speaking with friends and having fun outside,
and forget about this little game ;)

If your idea is sooooo cool that you feel like you NEED to implement
this, drop me an email so that we can consider together how cool this
idea would be, add a paragraph to this page, and then move on to
another project...